Pong LAN on ESP8266 – Documentation
Project Overview

This project allows you to host a multiplayer Pong game on a single ESP8266 board using LittleFS for file storage and AJAX polling to synchronize two players on the same network.

Key features:

Two-player Pong game playable from different devices connected to the same ESP8266.

Synchronization of game state (paddles, ball, scores) via AJAX polling.

Dynamic colors for paddles and ball.

Configurable points to win with a menu.

Buzzer sound when the ball hits paddles or scores.

Display of player IPs for each connected client.

Pop-up message when a player wins.

🔹 Hardware Requirements

1 × ESP8266 board (e.g., Wemos D1 mini / LOLIN D1 R2)

Wi-Fi network for multiplayer devices

USB cable to program the ESP8266

🔹 Software Requirements

Arduino IDE ≥ 1.8.19

ESP8266 board support installed

LittleFS plugin installed for file upload

Files stored in data/ folder: index.html, css/style.css, js/script.js

🔹 File Structure
data/
 ├── index.html        → Main game HTML
 ├── css/
 │    └── style.css    → Game styling
 └── js/
      └── script.js    → Game logic and AJAX polling

🔹 Code Overview
1. ESP8266 Sketch (C++)

Wi-Fi connection: ESP8266 connects to the network and prints its IP in Serial Monitor.

LittleFS: Serves static files (index.html, CSS, JS).

HTTP routes:

/ → serves index.html.

/state.json → returns the current game state (paddles, ball, scores, winner, player IPs).

/move?key= → receives paddle movement from players (w, s, up, down).

/start?maxScore= → starts a new game with selected points to win.

/reset → resets the game.

Game state:
The GameState struct tracks:

Paddle positions (leftY, rightY)

Ball position and speed (ballX, ballY, ballSpeedX, ballSpeedY)

Scores (leftScore, rightScore)

Maximum score to win (maxScore)

Winner text (winner)

Player IPs (player1IP, player2IP)

Player registration:
The first two devices accessing /state.json are assigned as Player 1 and Player 2, based on their IP addresses.
The ESP prints these IPs in the Serial Monitor.

Game logic:

Ball movement with bounce on top/bottom walls.

Paddle collision detection.

Scoring and buzzer sound on goal.

Dynamic winner detection and reset.

AJAX polling:
Clients fetch /state.json every 50ms (~20 FPS) to synchronize the game state.

2. index.html

HTML page with:

<canvas> for the game.

Menu for selecting points to win.

“Start Game” button.

Pop-up for winner display.

Paragraphs to show your IP and other player IP.

3. style.css

Styles the canvas, menu, and pop-up window.

Applies dark background, borders, and responsive display.

Hidden pop-up class (.hidden) toggled when game ends.

4. script.js

Handles drawing the game in <canvas>: paddles, ball, scores, dynamic colors.

Handles keyboard input:

Player 1 → W/S

Player 2 → Arrow Up / Arrow Down

Sends input to ESP via /move?key=.

Polls /state.json for updated game state and updates canvas.

Updates player IPs and other player IPs on the page.

Shows winner pop-up when game ends.

🔹 Multiplayer Flow

Both players connect to the ESP8266 IP via a web browser.

ESP registers the first two IPs as Player 1 and Player 2.

Players choose points to win and click “Start Game”.

Players control their paddles via keyboard.

AJAX polling keeps the game synchronized across both devices.

When a player reaches the max score, a pop-up announces the winner.

Players can reset the game using the popup button or reload.

🔹 Notes and Limitations

Only two players supported. Additional connections are ignored.

Polling via AJAX may introduce slight latency; not as fast as WebSocket.

Works only on the same local network.

Ensure LittleFS upload is done before running the sketch.

🔹 Setup Instructions

Install ESP8266 board in Arduino IDE.

Install LittleFS plugin and upload data/ folder contents to ESP.

Update ssid and password in the sketch.

Compile and upload the sketch.

Open Serial Monitor (115200 baud) to see:

ESP8266 IP: 192.168.1.X


Connect from browsers at http://ESP_IP/.

Select points to win → click Start → play Pong!

🔹 Serial Monitor Output

Example:

Connecting...
ESP8266 IP: 192.168.1.50
Player 1 connected: 192.168.1.101
Player 2 connected: 192.168.1.102

🔹 Future Improvements

Implement smoother WebSocket-based communication for real-time gameplay.

Add sound effects for paddle hits or scoring.

Add single-player mode.

Support more than 2 players with multiple paddles.

Optimize frame rate and colors for better graphics.